Quantifying Evolvability
========================

Techniques to quantify evolvability are necessary to study it empirically.
Reflecting the plurality of definitions for the term in the literature, several of measures of evolvability have been designed.
These metrics are in no way mutually exclusive.
In fact, they might be viewed as complementary as several measure distinct aspects of evolvability.
Techniques to quantify evolvability relevant to evolutionary computing only, not biology, will be reviewed here.

The maximum fitness value achieved by an evolving system provides a convenient and straightforward, but blunt, assessment of evolvability.
While evolvability is an important factor in successful evolutionary search, such fitness-based measures do not directly assess the the potential of an evolutionary system to generate viable variation.
Thus, such a measure is not directly predictive of properties associated with
evolutionary systems with high evolvability, such as the ability to
adapt to new, untested environments
[[Tarapore and Mouret, 2015]](#Tarapore2015EvolvabilityBenchmarks).

Reisinger et al. employ an evolvability measure that specifically targets acquired evolvability, bias towards viable variation learned in response to the fitness structure of a particular environment [[Reisinger et al., 2005]](#Reisinger2005TowardsEvolvability).
In their words, their measure targets “the representation’s ability to retain and generalize information learned about a changing domain.”
Essentially, Reisinger et al. assesses evolvability as the correlation between the bias towards viable variation exhibited by an evolving system and the amount of information on the fitness structure of an environment the representation receives.
Reisinger et al. work with temporally varying fitness functions, where fitness criteria are adjusted from generation to generation.
Importantly, these adjustments are made to preserve invariant properties across all fitness criteria.
In the bit-string domain employed by Reisinger et al., for example, all fitness criteria manifest bilateral symmetry.
The amount of information broadcast to the evolving system is controlled by varying the target drift rate, the rate at which changes to the fitness function are made.
Maximal information on the invariant properties of a fitness environment is broadcast at a middling rate of fitness criteria adjustment; adjusting fitness criteria too quickly amounts to training the evolving system on “random noise” and adjusting them too slowly amounts to training the evolving system under a nearly static evaluation scheme where insufficient evolutionary pressure to learn the invariant properties of a fitness environment is exerted.
Reisinger et al. measure the assess the amount of bias towards viable variation learned by an evolving system by measuring the efficiency with which an evolving system trained in a fitness environment with invariant properties (i.e. bilateral symmetry) adapts to entirely novel fitness criteria that maintain those invariant properties.
It is contended that in a highly evolvable system, maximum bias towards viable variation should be observed at a middling rate of fitness function change.
A numerical measure of evolvability is thus calculated as the variance of adaptation over a range of target drift rates encountered during training.

Mengistu et al. develop a measure for individual evolvability, relying upon the characterization of evolvability as heritable variation, to power their evolvability search method [[Mengistu et al., 2016]](#Mengistu2016EvolvabilityIt).
To assess individual evolvability, a sample of an individual’s offspring are generated.
A Euclidean distance measure in the phenotype space is used to bin the generated offspring.
Individuals exhibiting phenotypic distance from the representatives of each pre-existing bin exceeding a pre-defined, domain-specific threshold are used to found a new bin.
The number of bins generated by this process, essentially a count of distinct behaviors present among a sample of the individual’s offspring, serves as the metric of evolvability.
Wilder and Stanley take a parallel approach to Mengistu et al., but sample offspring from an entire population instead of an individual in order to measure population evolvability instead of individual evolvability [[Wilder and Stanley, 2015]](#Wilder2015ReconcilingEvolvability).

Clune et al. assess evolvability by examining the relationship between
parental fitness and offspring fitness [[Clune et al., 2011]](#Clune2011OnRegularity).
Their approach evolvability provides a window into the amounts of both viable variation and (to a lesser degree) overall heritable phenotypic variation present among offspring.
The fitness impacts of variation, how much is how helpful or harmful, are assessed by examining the proportion of offspring with fitness greater than (or less than) their parents and, using reasonable threshold values, the proportion of offspring with fitness much greater than (or much less than) their parents.
The spread of differences between parental and offspring fitness is taken as a proxy for the diversity of phenotypic form among offspring.
In this scheme, a wide spread of fitness changes would indicate high individual
evolvability.
While phenotypic variability and fitness variability are certainly correlated to some extent, the distinction between the two should be noted; this measure provides at best an indirect measure of phenotypic variability among offspring.

Tarapore et al. recently introduced an evolvability measure that attempts to take a more clear-eyed view of both of the primary aspects of evolvability: the amount of heritable variation among offspring and the fitness effects of that variation [[Tarapore and Mouret, 2015]](#Tarapore2015EvolvabilityBenchmarks).
They forgo use of a scalar metric to describe evolvability, instead reporting evolvability using what they term a “signature.”
Essentially, the signature is a two-dimensional heatmap presenting the changes in phenotypic form and fitness observed in individual offspring from a single parent.
Normalized mutual information between the phenotypic states of parent and offspring is used to quantify the amount of change in phenotypic form observed in an offspring.
Proportion decrease in fitness is used to quantify the fitness difference between parent and offspring.
For a highly evolvable individual, we would expect to see offspring occurring with significant frequency in the corner of the heatmap indicating significant change in phenotypic form with slight or no loss of fitness.
The evolvability signature provides a nuanced snapshot of evolvability, allowing for interaction between the two primary components of evolvability to be visualized.
Such information can be highly diagnostic, for example alerting researchers to phenomena that might appear falsely promising using other metrics, such as genetic changes that alter phenotypic form significantly but at great cost to fitness or genetic changes that are beneficial to fitness but fail to uncover novel phenotypic form.

References
----------

<a name="Clune2011OnRegularity">
Clune, J., Stanley, K. O., Pennock, R. T., and Ofria, C. (2011). On the performance of
indirect encoding across the continuum of regularity. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation.
</a>

<a name="Mengistu2016EvolvabilityIt">
Mengistu, H., Lehman, J., and Clune, J. (2016). Evolvability Search: Directly Selecting for Evolvability in order to Study and Produce It. GECCO Proceedings.
</a>

<a name="Reisinger2005TowardsEvolvability">
Reisinger, J., Stanley, K. O., and Miikkulainen, R. (2005). Towards an Empirical Measure of Evolvability. GECCO05 Proceedings.
</a>

<a name="Tarapore2015EvolvabilityBenchmarks">
Tarapore, D. and Mouret, J. B. (2015). Evolvability signatures of generative encodings: Beyond standard performance benchmarks. Information Sciences.
</a>

<a name="Wilder2015ReconcilingEvolvability">
Wilder, B. and Stanley, K. (2015). Reconciling explanations for the evolution of evolvability. Adaptive Behavior, 23(3):171–179.
</a>
